---
title: "Research"
date: 2023-05-05T08:54:23-04:00
draft: false
---

The motivation behind my proposed research project stems from my personal desire to work with data based markering through a more analysis and decision based project. I also want to be able to work on a project that is meaningful to me and will help make a difference, so working with animal shelters to help animals get adopted is something that I am looking forward to. Being passionate about animals and wanting to ensure that all animals that are placed unfortunately in shelters get the chance to be adopted into loving homes, I hope that my project will find ways to make that difference in shelters. Specifically, my project aims to be able to work with animal shelters to incorporate data driven marketing into their strategies to hopefully help them improve adoption rates. I would like to be able to work with local and help them to utilize their data and strategies.
The current state of the art of my project is that I've been looking at and familiarizing myself with various online datasets provided by animal shelters and online animal shelter data pertaining to various things like intake and outtake. I also have begun working hands on with some of the data, specifically the Austin Animal Shelter Outtake Dataset. I've begun familiarizing myself with it, organizing it, and using python and matplotlib to create graphs and visualizations about my data. I still need to work on more in depth further analysis and creating more visualizations, and maybe even putting it all on a dashboard so it's more accessible and understandable. I also think that maybe I could work more with marketing dstrategies and how to implement them based on my data. But, I have been creating visualizations that can be used to highlight trends in teh data and point to different factors that affect/go into adoption rates of animals at the animal shelters.

The current state of research in data driven marketing in animal shelters is that animal shelters do not currently utilize data to help them drive marketing enough. The knowledge gap that I found is that only about half of the animals that are placed in shelters per year are adopted out of them - 3.2 million out of 6.5 million. My research tells me that shelters do not use enough data analytics to determine why people adopt pets, which pets are more likely to be adopted based on types of marketing efforts. Why do some pets get adopted and others don’t? Could increased focus on data and improved marketing help more animals get adopted out of these shelters?

I know that this gap exists because I have done research into animal shelter data and statistics, as well as ways in which they can use data to benefit them. And while I was looking, I found that animal shelters don't normally seem to use data proficiently, if at all, to motivate their marketing strategies, and by implementing better data analytical tactics, maybe adoption rates could be increased.
I've found that there are factors and characteristics about animals that have an effect on their liklihood of being adopted (or at least animals that have certain features are more likely to be adopted - even down to names).
I also have thought about the possibility of looking into the types of people that look to/should adopt & what kinds of animals they adopt to see whether or not marketing strategies and target markets could be affected by this. I mean, if you look into what kind of people adopt what kind of pets, you could potentially alter your marketing strategies to target specific types of animals to specific types of people or something along those lines.
I think that by looking at and visualizing the factors and characteristics about animals that have an effect on their adoption likelihood, decisions can be made to ensure that adoption rates are increased for all animals. Marketing strategies can be updated to ensure that the right animals are targeted to the right customers, or animals can be marketed differently to help increase their chances of adoption.
The ultimate goals of my project are to be able to investigate and analyze animal shelter data to help animal shelters make effective decisions and marketing strategies to help increase adoption rates. I want to be able to get more comfortable with animal shelter data and use it to create visualizations that will help point out helpful trends in the data that can be used to help improve marketing strategies in animal shelters. I really hope that I can work with a local shelter for my final project, and I also hope to be able to incorporate more research on marketing tactics and customer data.
 Related work? I read and researched Katherine Leyonmark's marketing data comp. She heavily explored the combination of data and marketing in her research, which correlates with my topic idea and would be a great source of study for me. I also read some articles that point to the usefulness of data driven marketing in animal shelters; ex: https://towardsdatascience.com/saving-animal-lives-with-data-d815c6e854eb; "Dataset of relationships among social media marketing activities, brand loyalty, revisit intention. Evidence from the hospitality industry in Northern Cyprus"
“How Nonprofits Can Use Storytelling and Engagement Metrics to Improve How They Share their Philanthropy Narrative” - Mary McInerney
This article describes how nonprofit organizations use storytelling as an effective strategy to promote their philanthropy and increase engagement with donors/customers. It emphasizes how important it is for data and storytelling to be combined and work together in a company's strategies, as they are often seen separately. Data driven decision making is highly important and can work for businesses, specifically nonprofits, to gauge how successful their strategies are at engagement with customers/donors. This article emphasizes how nonprofits use authentic storytelling as a method to engage customers and then measure that engagement through data. It shows how to analyze the metrics of storytelling such as through Google Analytics to make business decisions. This article aims to answer questions about what methods of marketing strategies work effectively, specifically for nonprofits. It highlights the storytelling aspect combined with data analysis as a very effective measure to take and commits research to back up its theories. For one, this article acknowledges that oftentimes the combination of storytelling & data to work together in marketing strategies is overlooked, and part of the goal of this article is to explain and give reason as to why they should be seen together more often and how beneficial this method would be.This article uses a few different methods to perform/back up their research. The primary data used is a review of academic studies and literature as well as interviews of experts to see insight into how this method helps nonprofits share their narrative and increase engagement. The secondary data was collected from organizational analytics on readership and engagement metrics as part of a University of San Francisco case study, plus responses made by donors and alumni about how philanthropy stories impact them.The results show that audiences become more engaged through a steady stream of high quality, authentic stories. It also supports the university's goals to promote their philanthropies and a "more just, humane, and sustainable world." By collecting data and analyzing it, this study was able to use their findings to show that the research question is answered in that audiences tend to become engaged through storytelling. The article makes a point to mention that not all stories are the same but the literature and data show that nonprofits should use storytelling that focuses on impact because it develops engagement with their audiences.This article validates its results by explaining how the data and literature support their ideas. They use a real case study done at University of San Francisco that used storytelling to reach their audiences, then showed the data/Google Analytics results for engagement, and then interviewed donors to see why those stories were impactful. They show results that the pageviews for philanthropy stories has consistently increased.I think it could be cool to look into ways that nonprofits use marketing strategies, specifically by combining storytelling and data analysis to make business decisions. I've been doing research into how nonprofit organizations use marketing strategies and how they use data to effectively measure how these strategies work to reach their intended audiences and spread their philanthropy.

The prototype that I've been working on contains a set of graphs and visualizations that represent the Austin Animal Shelter Outtake data that can be used to analyze trends in adoption rates surrounding different characteristics of animals like breed, color, name, etc. to help determine where to allocate resources for marketing strategies.
The design of my experiment thus far uses a csv file containing a dataset consisting of outtake data and various animal characteristics along with adoption rates provided by the Austin Animal Shelter. I then have been using python and matplotlib to create graphs and visualizations that represent the data and trends in the data and different characteristics involving adoption rates.
Evaluation I have been working with getting comfortable with the data and using python. I began smaller and struggled a bit with the learning curve, but I have been able to provide some visuals that are effective, like popularly adopted dog breeds etc. I can then analyze these graphs and visualizations to determine why some animals are adopted more so than others and try to help develop marketing strategies that will help more animals get adopted.
I still need to work on narrowing down my data and figuring out what pieces to highlight as well as cleaning up the datasets and graphs etc. I hope that my work will be able to actually be useful and succeed in improving adoption rates.
 My results thus far show that different characteristics go into rates of adoption. For example, I was able to create a graph that represented the top 10 dog breeds that are adopted. By identifying and analyzing which breeds are more likely to be adopted and why, I can work with shelters to help improve their marketing tactics to cater to lesser adopted breeds and allocate their resources more effectively and target specific demographics. I can expand this research to other characteristics as well such as name, color, etc. For example, does having a name give an animal a greater chance of adoption, and if so what names for what types of animals are most likely to lead to their adoption?
 I hope to expand my project, create a dashboard, and incorporate more data; ie: local data, customer data, and marketing strategies data. I would like to be able to use an effective dashboard software like Streamlit to be able to expand on my project and create visuals that are easily accessible and understandable. I think that working with a local animal shelter in Meadville or Erie would be beneficial as opposed to the online dataset that I was using. I would be able to get more hands-on experience with the shelter, help them use their data and find specifically what I’m looking for, and hopefully be able to help them work on their marketing strategies and directly implement them and see their results. Additionally, if I worked with local shelters I could hopefully be able to incorporate customer data in addition to the animal/outtake data. I could maybe provide surveys to get a better understanding of the potential adopters and what they look for when adopting. I also want to do more research into marketing tactics of animal shelters, like what kind of marketing strategies do they currently use and what statistics are there that show how effective they are. When working with animals and private customer data, it is important to remain ethical. Animals should be treated with respect and proper treatment, never interfering with their safety. Additionally, if using customer data and preferences, it is important to note that their information is private and confidential and should not be taken advantage of or shared with the public without consent. I hope to be able to continue to expand and work on my project to make useful and effective data driven marketing decisions for animal shelters that will hopefully increase their adoption rates.



